README.md, before:

## Stabilizer: Statistically Rigorous Performance Evaluation
[Charlie Curtsinger](http://www.cs.umass.edu/~charlie) and [Emery D. Berger](http://www.cs.umass.edu/~emery)

Copyright (C) 2013 University of Massachusetts Amherst

### About
Stabilizer is a compiler transformation and runtime library for dynamic memory 
layout randomization. Programs built with Stabilizer run with randomly-placed 
functions, stack frames, and heap objects. Functions and stack frames are moved 
repeatedly during execution. A random memory layout eliminates the effect of 
layout on performance, and repeated randomization leads to normally-distributed 
execution times. This makes it straightforward to use standard statistical tests 
for performance evaluation.

A more detailed description of Stabilizer is available in the 
[Paper](http://www.cs.umass.edu/~charlie/stabilizer.pdf), which will appear at
ASPLOS 2013 in March.

### Requirements
Stabilizer requires [LLVM 3.1](http://llvm.org/releases/download.html#3.1). 
Stabilizer runs on OSX and Linux, and supports x86, x86_64, and PowerPC.

Stabilizer requires LLVM 3.1. Follow the directions
[here](http://clang.llvm.org/get_started.html) to build LLVM 3.1 and the Clang
front-end. Stabilizer's build system assumes LLVM include files will be
accessible through your default include path.

By default, Stabilizer will use GCC and the 
[Dragonegg](http://dragonegg.llvm.org/) plugin to produce LLVM IR. Fortran 
programs can only be built with the GCC front end. Stabilizer is tested 
against GCC version 4.6.2.

Stabilizer's compiler driver `szc` is written in Python.  It uses the 
`argparse` module, so a relatively modern version of Python (>=2.7) is required.

### Building Stabilizer
```
$ git clone git://github.com/ccurtsinger/stabilizer.git stabilizer
$ make
```

By default, Stabilizer is build with debug output enabled.  Run 
`make clean release` to build the release version with asserts and debug output 
disabled.

### Using Stabilizer
Stabilizer includes the `szc` compiler driver, which builds programs using the 
Stabilizer compiler transformations.  `szc` passes on common GCC flags, and is 
compatible with C, C++ and Fortran inputs.

To compile a program in `foo.c` with Stabilizer, run:
```
$ szc -Rcode -Rstack -Rheap foo.c -o foo
```

The `-R` flags enable randomizations, and may be used in any combination.
Stabilizer uses GCC with the Dragonegg plugin as its default front-end. To
use clang, pass `-frontend=clang` to `szc`.

The resulting executable is linked against with `libstabilizer.so` (or `.dylib` 
on OSX). Place this library somewhere in your system's dynamic library search
path or (preferably) add the Stabilizer base directory to your `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
or `DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH` environment variable.

### SPEC CPU2006
The `szchi.cfg` and `szclo.cfg` config files can be installed in a SPEC CPU2006
config directory to build and run benchmarks with Stabilizer. The szchi config 
`-O2` for base and `-O3` for peak tuning, and szclo uses `-O0` and `-O1`.

The `run.py` and `process.py` scripts were used to drive experiments and
collect results. The run script accepts optimization levels, benchmarks to
enable (or disable with a "-" prefix), a number of runs, and build 
configurations in any order.  For example:

```
$ ./run.py 10 bzip2 code code.stack code.heap.stack
```
This will run the `bzip2` benchmark 10 times in each of three randomization
configurations. The `runspec` tool must be in your path, so `cd` to your SPEC
installation and `sourceh shrc` first.

```
$ ./run.py 10 -astar code link O2 O3
```
This will run every benchmark except `astar` 10 times with link randomization
at `-O2` and `-O3` optimization levels.

Be warned: there is no easy way to distinguish `O2` and `O0` results after the
fact: both are marked as "base" tuning.  Keep these results in separate 
directories.

The process script reads `.rsf` files from SPEC and provides some summary
statistics, or collects results in an easy-to-process format.

```
$ ./process.py $SPEC/result/*.rsf
```
This will print average runtimes for each benchmark in each configuration and
tuning level for the runs in your SPEC results directory.

Pass the `-trim` flag to remove the highest and lowest runtimes before computing 
the average.

The `-norm` flag tests the results for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test.

The `-all` flag dumps all results to console, suitable for pasting into a
spreadsheet or CSV file.

### License
Stabilizer is distributed under the GNU GPLv2 license. Contact 
<charlie@cs.umass.edu> if you are interested in licensing Stabilizer for
commercial use.

Commit message:

Updated README.md. There needs to be an updated guide on how to install LLVM 3.1

README.md, after:

## Stabilizer: Statistically Rigorous Performance Evaluation
[Charlie Curtsinger](http://www.cs.umass.edu/~charlie) and [Emery D. Berger](http://www.cs.umass.edu/~emery)

Copyright (C) 2013 University of Massachusetts Amherst

### About
Stabilizer is a compiler transformation and runtime library for dynamic memory 
layout randomization. Programs built with Stabilizer run with randomly-placed 
functions, stack frames, and heap objects. Functions and stack frames are moved 
repeatedly during execution. A random memory layout eliminates the effect of 
layout on performance, and repeated randomization leads to normally-distributed 
execution times. This makes it straightforward to use standard statistical tests 
for performance evaluation.

A more detailed description of Stabilizer is available in the 
[Paper](http://www.cs.umass.edu/~charlie/stabilizer.pdf), which will appear at
ASPLOS 2013 in March.

### Requirements
Stabilizer requires [LLVM 3.1](http://llvm.org/releases/download.html#3.1). 
Stabilizer runs on OSX and Linux, and supports x86, x86_64, and PowerPC.

Stabilizer requires LLVM 3.1. Follow the directions
[here](http://clang.llvm.org/get_started.html) to build LLVM 3.1 and the Clang
front-end. Stabilizer's build system assumes LLVM include files will be
accessible through your default include path. [Needs Editing: LLVM 3.1 is fairly old and the directions no longer work]

By default, Stabilizer will use GCC and the 
[Dragonegg](http://dragonegg.llvm.org/) plugin to produce LLVM IR. Fortran 
programs can only be built with the GCC front end. Stabilizer is tested 
against GCC version 4.6.2.

Stabilizer's compiler driver `szc` is written in Python.  It uses the 
`argparse` module, so a relatively modern version of Python (>=2.7) is required.

### Building Stabilizer
```
$ git clone git://github.com/ccurtsinger/stabilizer.git stabilizer
$ make
```

By default, Stabilizer is build with debug output enabled.  Run 
`make clean release` to build the release version with asserts and debug output 
disabled.

### Using Stabilizer
Stabilizer includes the `szc` compiler driver, which builds programs using the 
Stabilizer compiler transformations.  `szc` passes on common GCC flags, and is 
compatible with C, C++ and Fortran inputs.

To compile a program in `foo.c` with Stabilizer, run:
```
$ szc -Rcode -Rstack -Rheap foo.c -o foo
```

The `-R` flags enable randomizations, and may be used in any combination.
Stabilizer uses GCC with the Dragonegg plugin as its default front-end. To
use clang, pass `-frontend=clang` to `szc`.

The resulting executable is linked against with `libstabilizer.so` (or `.dylib` 
on OSX). Place this library somewhere in your system's dynamic library search
path or (preferably) add the Stabilizer base directory to your `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
or `DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH` environment variable.

### SPEC CPU2006
The `szchi.cfg` and `szclo.cfg` config files can be installed in a SPEC CPU2006
config directory to build and run benchmarks with Stabilizer. The szchi config 
`-O2` for base and `-O3` for peak tuning, and szclo uses `-O0` and `-O1`.

The `run.py` and `process.py` scripts were used to drive experiments and
collect results. The run script accepts optimization levels, benchmarks to
enable (or disable with a "-" prefix), a number of runs, and build 
configurations in any order.  For example:

```
$ ./run.py 10 bzip2 code code.stack code.heap.stack
```
This will run the `bzip2` benchmark 10 times in each of three randomization
configurations. The `runspec` tool must be in your path, so `cd` to your SPEC
installation and `sourceh shrc` first.

```
$ ./run.py 10 -astar code link O2 O3
```
This will run every benchmark except `astar` 10 times with link randomization
at `-O2` and `-O3` optimization levels.

Be warned: there is no easy way to distinguish `O2` and `O0` results after the
fact: both are marked as "base" tuning.  Keep these results in separate 
directories.

The process script reads `.rsf` files from SPEC and provides some summary
statistics, or collects results in an easy-to-process format.

```
$ ./process.py $SPEC/result/*.rsf
```
This will print average runtimes for each benchmark in each configuration and
tuning level for the runs in your SPEC results directory.

Pass the `-trim` flag to remove the highest and lowest runtimes before computing 
the average.

The `-norm` flag tests the results for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test.

The `-all` flag dumps all results to console, suitable for pasting into a
spreadsheet or CSV file.

### License
Stabilizer is distributed under the GNU GPLv2 license. Contact 
<charlie@cs.umass.edu> if you are interested in licensing Stabilizer for
commercial use.
